# Fifth generation Honda Civic VX - Hatchback
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Honda_Civic_(fifth_generation)#Hatchback
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Honda_Civic_(fifth_generation)

Quote:
- """Introduced in September 1991 for the 1992 model year, the redesigned Civic featured increased dimensions, as well as more aerodynamic styling. The wagon variant was now only available in the Japanese market where the previous generation wagon was carried over until 1995. The efficiency of the previous HF model was replaced by the VX hatchback which, with an EPA rating of 48 / 55 miles per US gallon (4.9 / 4.3 L/100 km; 58 / 66 mpg‑imp), was Honda's most fuel efficient model sold at the time."""
- """VX: During the late 1980s and the early 1990s, as a result of high gasoline prices and the consumer demand for relief, automobile companies, particularly Toyota and Honda competed to see who could field the most fuel efficient production automobile. The Civic VX was Honda's entry for 1992.

Fitted with the same manual transmission as the USDM CX, the VX was identical to the base model CX except that it gained improved fuel efficiency from various weight reduction methods such as reduced trim and molding, VX model-specific lightweight 13-inch aluminum alloy wheels, 165/70/R13 tires, and through a 92 hp (69 kW) 1.5 L (D15Z1) VTEC-E engine. These features on the VX yielded 48/55 mpg (city/hwy) [revised to 2008 EPA rating: 39/49 mpg city/hwy[5]] or 44/51 mpg (city/hwy) [revised to 2008 EPA rating: 36/46 mpg city/hwy[6]] The VX remains a favorite of Hypermilers.[7]

The D15Z1 engines efficiency was enhanced by placing cam followers at every cam lobe and the use of only two piston rings per cylinder, and the ability to burn an ultra-lean air fuel mixture at and below 2,500 RPM at low load. This was achieved by only opening one valve during the intake stroke, rather than both, placing the multiport fuel injectors very near the intake valves, and by using an ultra sensitive oxygen sensor. The sensor has two O2 measurement electrochemical cells, rather than the single cell that at the time was universal. This same model sensor has been adopted by racing teams to monitor the combustion in each cylinder of racing engines during the tuning process, one per cylinder, because of its sensitivity.

The opening of only one intake valve below 2,500 rpm results in much more of the pressure drop between atmospheric pressure, and the inside of the cylinder to be across the valve than would otherwise be the case. This results in an exceptionally turbulent flow, very good mixing of the charge, very high speed flame propagation at ignition, high resistance to predetonation (knock), and very low amounts of unburned hydrocarbons, and carbon monoxide, and increased engine torque, and power in both lean burn mode, and at more normal fuel-air mixtures, below 2,500 rpm. As a result of the increased torque and power at low rpm, the engine's torque and power curves are between those of normally-aspirated gasoline and diesel engines. Combined with the decent aerodynamics of the Civic VX, the car could operate at highway speeds in lean burn mode.

One of the few rocks Honda left unturned in search of better fuel economy was increasing the final drive ratio of the VX, usually expressed as the number of engine revolutions per mile in the transmission's top gear. Since the ratio of the VX is identical to the CX, despite the engine's greater power, low end torque, and the car's lower coefficient of drag the use of a higher final drive ratio would have resulted in a drivable car, with even higher fuel economy. The lower than necessary final drive ratio results in a vehicle that is remarkably quick off the line, for one that can get 50 MPG on the highway. A higher ratio could have been accomplished by transmission modifications, such as an overdrive top gear, a dual-range transmission, or simply by using larger-diameter wheels, in conjunction with a wide-ratio transmission, so there would be sufficient torque on the driving wheels in first gear.

In Canada, the VX was rated by Transport Canada fuel consumption estimate: 4.7L/100 km city and 4.3L/100 km hwy.[8] Other added features were an 8,000 rpm tachometer with redline at 6,000 rpm, lightweight 13-inch (330 mm) aluminum alloy wheels, as well as additional front & rear under-body trim additions to improve aerodynamic flow.[citation needed] The VX was also equipped with an aluminum alternator bracket, an aluminum front driver's side engine mount, and a lightweight crank pulley. In addition, the instrument cluster of the CX and VX featured a shift indicator light that would notify the driver when to shift upward in order to achieve optimum fuel economy. The CX and VX models have been lauded as gasoline-powered cars which rival the fuel economy of today's hybrids and diesels.[7] In the March 2010 issue of Car & Driver, it mentions its long-term test car, a 2009 VW TDI Jetta with 6-speed dual-clutch auto transmission, got worse fuel mileage (38 mpg) than their 1992 Honda Civic VX test car (which got 41 mpg) and 2000 Honda Insight hybrid (48 mpg).[9]"""
